the BCCI affair a report to the
Committee on Foreign Relations United
States Senate by Senator John Kerry and
Senator Hank Brown December 1992 102nd
Congress second session Senate print 1 0
2 - 1 4 0 this December 1992 document is
the penultimate draft of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee report on
the BCCI affair after it was released by
the committee senator Hank Brown
reportedly acting at the behest of Henry
Kissinger pressed for the deletion of a
few passages particularly in chapter 20
on BCCI and Kissinger associates as a
result the final hard copy version of
the report as published by the
Government Printing Office differs
slightly from the committee's soft copy
version presented below Stephen
Aftergood Federation of American
scientists executive summary one BCCI
constituted international financial
crime on a massive and global scale
BCCI's unique criminal structure an
elaborate corporate spider web with bcc
i--'s founder agra hassan obd and his
assistant Suellen akka v in the middle
was an essential component of its
spectacular growth and a guarantee of
its eventual collapse the structure was
conceived by a b d and managed by Naqvi
for the specific purpose of evading
regulation or control by governments it
functioned to frustrate the full
understanding of BCCI's operations by
anyone unlike any ordinary bank BCCI was
from its earliest days made up of
multiplying layers of entities related
to one another through an impenetrable
series of holding companies affiliates
subsidiaries banks within Banks insider
dealings and nominee relationships
by fracturing corporate structure
record-keeping regulatory review and
audits the complex BCCI family of
entities created by a BD was able to
evade ordinary legal restrictions on the
movement of capital and goods as a
matter of daily practice and routine in
creating BCCI as a vehicle fundamentally
free of government control a BD
developed in BCCI an ideal mechanism for
facilitating illicit activity by others
including such activity by officials of
many of the governments whose laws BCCI
was breaking BCCI's criminality included
fraud by BCCI and BCCI customers
involving billions of dollars money
laundering in Europe Africa Asia and the
Americas BCCI's bribery of officials in
most of those locations support of
terrorism arms trafficking and the sale
of nuclear technologies management of
prostitution the Commission and
facilitation of income tax evasion
smuggling and illegal immigration
illicit purchases of banks and real
estate and a panoply of financial crimes
limited only by the imagination of its
officers and customers among BCCI's
principle mechanisms for committing
crimes or its use of shell corporations
and bank confidentiality and secrecy
havens layering of its corporate
structure its use of frontmen and
nominees guarantees and buyback
arrangements back-to-back financial
documentation among BCCI controlled
entities kickbacks and bribes the
intimidation of witnesses and the
retention of well-placed insiders to
discourage governmental action to BCCI
systematically bribed world leaders and
political figures throughout the world
BCCI systematically relied on
relationships with and as necessary
payments to prominent political figures
in most of the seven
three countries in which BCCI operated
BCCI records and testimony from former
BCCI officials together document bcc
i--'s systematic securing of central
bank deposits of third world countries
its provision of favors to political
figures and its reliance on those
figures to provide BCCI itself with
favors and times of need these
relationships were systematically turned
to BCCI's use to generate cash needed to
prop up its books BCCI would obtain an
important figures agreement to give BCCI
deposits from a country's central bank
exclusive handling of a country's use of
US commodity credits preferential
treatment on the processing of money
coming in and out of the country where
monetary controls were in place the
right to own a bank secretly if
necessary in countries where foreign
banks were not legal and other
questionable means of securing assets or
profits in return BCC I would pay bribes
to the figure or otherwise give him
other things he wanted in a simple quid
pro quo the result was that BCCI had
relationships that ranged from the
questionable to the improper to the
fully corrupt with officials from
countries all over the world including
Argentina Bangladesh Botswana Brazil
Cameroon China Colombia the Congo Ghana
Guatemala the Ivory Coast India Jamaica
Kuwait Lebanon Mauritius Morocco Nigeria
Pakistan Panama Peru Saudi Arabia
Senegal Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Tunisia
the United Arab Emirates the United
States Zambia and Zimbabwe three BCCI
developed a strategy to infiltrate to
the US banking system which it
successfully implemented despite
regulatory barrier
that were designed to keep it out in
1977 BCCI developed a plan to infiltrate
the US market through secretly
purchasing US banks while opening branch
offices of BCCI throughout the US and
eventually merging the institution's
BCCI had significant difficulties
implementing this strategy
due to regulatory barriers in the United
States designed to ensure accountability
despite these barriers which delayed
BCCI's entry BCCI was ultimately
successful in acquiring for banks
operating in seven states and the
District of Columbia with no
jurisdiction successfully preventing
BCCI from infiltrating it the techniques
used by BCCI in the United States had
been previously perfected by BCCI and
were used in BCCI's acquisitions of
banks in a number of third world
countries and in Europe
these included purchasing banks through
nominees and arranging to have its
activities shielded by prestigious
lawyers accountants and public relations
firms on the one hand and politically
well-connected agents on the other these
techniques were essential to BCCI's
success in the United States because
without them BCCI
would have been stopped by regulators
from gaining an interest in any US bank
as it was regulatory suspicion towards
BCCI
required the bank to deceive regulators
and collusion with nominees including
the heads of state of foreign several
emirates key political and intelligence
figures from the middle-east and
entities controlled by the most
important bank and banker in the Middle
East equally important to BCCI's
successful secret acquisitions of US
banks in the face of regulatory
suspicion was its aggressive use of a
series of prominent Americans beginning
with Bert Lance and continuing with
former defense secretary Clark Clifford
former US Senator Stuart Symington
well-connected former federal
bank regulators and former and current
local state and federal legislators
wittingly or not these individuals
provided essential assistance to BCCI
through lending their names and their
reputations to BCCI at critical moments
thus it was not merely BCCI's deceptions
that permitted it to infiltrate the
United States and its banking system
also essential were BCCI's use of
political influence peddling and the
revolving door in Washington for the
Justice Department mishandled its
investigation and prosecution of BCCI
and its relationships with other
government agencies concerning BCCI
federal prosecutors in Tampa handling
the 1988 drug money laundering
indictment of BCCI failed to recognize
the importance of information they
received concerning BCCI's other crimes
including its apparent secret ownership
of first American as a result they
failed adequately to investigate these
allegations themselves or to refer this
portion of the case to the FBI and other
agencies at the Justice Department who
could have properly investigated the
additional information the Justice
Department along with the US Customs
Service and Treasury Department's failed
to provide adequate support and
assistance to investigators and
prosecutors working on the case against
BCCI in 1988 and 1989
contributing to conditions that
ultimately caused the chief undercover
agent who handled the sting against BCCI
to quit customs entirely the January
1990 plea agreement between BCCI
and the US attorney in Tampa kept BCCI
alive and had the effect of discouraging
BCCI's officials from telling the u.s.
what they knew about BCCI's larger
criminality including its ownership of
first American and other US banks
the Justice Department essentially
stopped investigating BCCI following the
plea agreement until press accounts
federal reserve action and the New York
District Attorney's investigation in New
York forced them into action in mid 1991
Justice Department personnel in
Washington lobbied state regulators to
keep BCCI open after the January 1990
plea agreement following lobbying of
them by former Justice Department
personnel now representing BCCI
relations between Maine Justice and
Washington and the US attorney for Miami
Dexter laitanan broke down on BCCI
related prosecutions and key actions on
BCCI related cases in Miami were as a
result delayed for months during 1991
Justice Department personnel in
Washington Miami and Tampa actively
obstructed and impeded congressional
attempts to investigate BCCI in 1990 and
this practice continued to some extent
until William P bar became Attorney
General in late October 1991 Justice
Department personnel in Washington Miami
and Tampa obstructed and impeded attempt
by New York District Attorney Robert
Morgenthau to obtain critical
information concerning BCCI in 1989 1990
and 1991 and in one case a federal
prosecutor lied to Morgan thaws office
concerning the existence of such
material important failures of
cooperation continued to take place
until William P bar became Attorney
General in late October 1991 cooperation
by the Justice Department with the
Federal Reserve was very limited until
after BCCI's global closure on July 5th
1991 some public statements by the
Justice Department concerning its
handling of matters pertaining to BCCI
were more cleverly crafted than true
fine
New York District Attorney Morgan
thought not only broke the case on BCCI
but indirectly brought about BCCI's
global closure acting on information
provided him by the subcommittee New
York district attorney Robert Morgenthau
began an investigation in 1989 of BCCI
which materially contributed to the
chain of events that resulted in bcc
i--'s closure questions asked by the
district attorney intensified the review
of bcc i--'s activities by its auditors
Pricewaterhouse in england and gave life
to a moribund federal reserve
investigation of bcc i--'s secret
ownership of first american the district
attorney's criminal investigation was
critical to stopping an intended
reorganization of bcc I worked out
through an agreement with the Bank of
England the government of Abu Dhabi
BCCI's auditors Price Waterhouse and
BCCI itself in which the nature and
extent of BCCI's criminality would be
suppressed
while abu dhabi would commit its
financial resources to keep the bank
going during a restructuring by the late
spring of 1991 the key obstacle to a
successful restructuring of BCCI Bank
rolled up Abu Dhabi was the possibility
that the District Attorney of New York
would indict such an indictment would
have inevitably caused a swift and
thoroughly justified international run
on BCCI by depositors all over the world
instead it was a substantial factor in
the decision of the Bank of England to
take the information it had received
from Price Waterhouse and rely on it to
close BCCI six BCCI's accountants failed
to protect bcc i--'s innocent depositors
and creditors from the consequences of
poor practices at the bank of which the
auditors were aware for years bcc i--'s
decision to divide its operations
between two auditors neither of whom had
the right to audit all BCCI operations
was a significant mechanism by which bcc
was able to hide its frauds during its
early years for more than a decade
neither of BCCI's auditors objected to
this practice BCCI provided loans and
financial benefits to some of its
auditors whose acceptance of these
benefits creates an appearance of
impropriety based on the possibility
that such benefits could in theory
affect the independent judgment of the
auditors involved these benefits
included loans to to Price Waterhouse
partnerships in the Caribbean in
addition there are serious questions
concerning the acceptance of payments
and possibly housing from BCCI
or its affiliates by Price Waterhouse
partners in the grand Caymans and
possible acceptance of sexual favors
provided by BCCI officials to certain
persons affiliated with the firm
regardless of BCCI's attempts to hide
its frauds from its outside auditors
there were numerous warning bells
visible to the auditors from the early
years of the bank's activities and
BCCI's auditors could have and should
have done more to respond to them by the
end of 1987 given Price Waterhouse UK's
knowledge about the inadequacies of
BCCI's records it had ample reason to
recognize that there could be no
adequate basis for certifying that it
had examined bcc i--'s books and records
and that its picture of those records
were indeed a true and fair view of bcc
i--'s financial state of affairs these
certifications by bcc i--'s auditors
that it's picture of bcc i--'s books
were true and fair from December 31st
1987 forward at the consequence of
assisting BCCI and misleading depositors
regulators investigators and other
financial institutions as to bcc i--'s
true financial condition prior to 1990
Price Waterhouse UK knew of gross
irregularities in bcc i--'s handling of
loans to CCA H first American and was
told of violations of US
banking laws by BCCI and its borrowers
in connection with CCA H first American
and failed to advise the partners of its
US affiliate or any US regulator there
is no evidence that price waterhouse UK
has to this day notified Pricewaterhouse
us of the extent of the problems that
found at bcc i or of bcc i--'s secret
ownership of CCA h first american given
the lack of information provided
Pricewaterhouse us by its united kingdom
affiliate the u.s. firm performed its
auditing of bcc i--'s u.s. branches in a
manner that was professional and
diligent albeit unenumerated concerning
bcc i--'s true activities in the united
states price Waterhouse's certification
of bcc i--'s books and records in april
1990 was explicitly conditioned by Price
Waterhouse UK on the proposition that
abu dhabi would bail bcc i-- out of its
financial losses and that the Bank of
England Abu Dhabi and BCCI would work
with the auditors to restructure the
bank and avoid its collapse Price
Waterhouse would not have made the
certification but for the assurances it
received from the Bank of England that
its continued certification of bcc i--'s
books was appropriate and indeed
necessary for the bank's survival the
April 1990 agreement among Price
Waterhouse UK abu dhabi BCCI
and the Bank of England described above
resulted in Price Waterhouse UK
certifying the financial picture
presented in its audit of BCCI as true
and fair with a single footnote material
to the huge losses still to be dealt
with and failed adequately to describe
their serious nature as a consequence
the certification was materially
misleading to anyone who relied on it
ignorant of the facts then mutually
known to BCCI Abu Dhabi Price Waterhouse
and the Bank of England the decision by
Abu Dhabi price war
House UK BCCI and the Bank of England to
reorganise BCCI
over the duration of 1990 and 1991
rather than to advise the public of what
they knew caused substantial injury to
innocent depositors and customers of
BCCI who continue to do business with an
institution which each of the above
parties knew had engaged in fraud from
at least April 1990 through November
1990 the government of Abu Dhabi had
knowledge of BCCI's criminality and
frauds which it apparently withheld from
BCC eyes outside auditors contributing
to the delay in the ultimate closure of
the bank and causing further injury to
the bank's innocent depositors and
customers 7 the CIA developed important
information on BCCI
and inadvertently failed to provide it
to those who could use it the CIA and
former CIA officials had a far wider
range of contacts and links to bcc i--
and bcc i-- shareholders officers and
customers than has been acknowledged by
the CIA by early 1985 the CIA knew more
about bcc i--'s goals and intentions
concerning the US banking system than
anyone else in government and provided
that information to the US Treasury and
the Office of the Comptroller of the
currency neither of whom had the
responsibility for regulating the first
American bank that BCCI had taken over
the CIA failed to provide the critical
information it had gathered to the
correct users of the information the
Federal Reserve and the Justice
Department after the CIA knew that BCCI
was as an institution a fundamentally
corrupt criminal enterprise they
continued to use both BCCI and first
American BCCI's secretly held US
subsidiary for CIA operations
while the reporting concerning BCCI by
the CIA was in some respects impressive
especially in its assembling of the
essentials of BCCI's criminality it's
secret purchase of first American by
1985 and its extensive involvement in
money laundering
there were also remarkable gaps in the
CIA's reported knowledge about BCCI
former CIA officials including former
CIA director Richard Helms and the late
William Casey former and current foreign
intelligence officials including Kamal
Adham
and Abdul Rauf Khalil and principal
foreign agents of the u.s. such as Adnan
Khashoggi
and manuchehr Gabbana fire flowed in and
out of BCCI at critical times in its
history and participate simultaneously
in the making of key episodes in u.s.
foreign policy ranging from the Camp
David peace talks to the arming of Iran
and as part of the iran-contra affair
yet the CIA has continued to maintain
that it has no information regarding any
involvement of these people raising
questions about the quality of
intelligence the CIA is receiving
generally or its candor with the
subcommittee the CIA's professions of
total ignorance about their respective
roles in BCCI
are out of character with the agency's
early knowledge of many critical aspects
of the bank's operations structure
personnel and history the errors made by
the CIA in connection with his handling
of BCCI
were complicated by its handling of this
congressional investigation initial
information that was provided by the CIA
was untrue later information that was
provided was incomplete and the agency
resisted providing a full account of its
knowledge of BCCI
until almost a year after the initial
requests for the information these
experiences suggest caution and
concluding that the information provided
to date is full and complete
relationships among former CIA personnel
and BCCI frontmen and nominees including
Kamal Adham Abdul Khalil and Mohammad
Atta Vani requires further investigation
eight the flawed decisions made by
regulators in the u.s. which allowed
BCCI to secretly acquire US banks were
caused in part by gaps in the regulatory
process and in part by BCCI's use of
well-connected lawyers to help them
through the process when the Federal
Reserve approved the takeover of
financial general Bancshares by CCA H in
1981 it had substantial circumstantial
evidence before it to suggest that BCCI
was behind the bank's purchase the
Federal Reserve chose not to act on that
evidence because of these specific
representations that were made to it by
CCA H's shareholders and lawyers that
BCCI was neither financing nor directing
the takeover these representations were
untrue and the Federal Reserve would not
have approved the CCA H application but
for the false statements made to it in
approving the CCA H application the
Federal Reserve relied upon
representations from the Central
Intelligence Agency State Department and
other US agencies that they had no
objections to or concerns about the
middle-eastern shareholders who were
purporting to purchase shares in the
bank the Federal Reserve also relied
upon the reputation for integrity of
BCCI's lawyers especially that of former
Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford and
former Federal Reserve counsel Baldwin
Tuttle assurances provided the Federal
Reserve by the CIA and State Department
and by both attorneys had a material
impact on the Federal Reserve's
willingness to approve the CCA H
application despite its concerns about
BCCI's possible involvement in 1981 the
Office of the Comptroller of the
currency
had additional information from reports
concerning BCCI's role in the Bank of
America and the National Bank of Georgia
concerning BCCI's possible use of
nominee arrangements and alter-egos to
purchase banks on its behalf in the
United States which it failed to pass on
to the Federal Reserve this failure was
inadvertent not intentional in approving
the CCA H application the Federal
Reserve permitted BCCI and its attorneys
to carve out a seeming loophole in the
commitment that BCCI and not be involved
in financing or controlling CCA HS
activities this loophole permitted BCCI
to act as an investment advisor and
information conduit to CCA HS
shareholders the Federal Reserve's
decision to accept this arrangement
allowed BCCI and its attorneys and
agents to use these permitted activities
as a cover for the true nature of BCCI's
ownership of CCA H and the first
American banks after approving the CCA H
application in 1981 the Federal Reserve
received few indicators about bcc i--'s
possible improper involvement in CCA H
first American however at several
critical junctures especially the
purchase by first American of the
National Bank of Georgia from gaya
throne in 1986 there were obvious
warning signs that could have been
investigated and which were not
until late 1990 as a foreign bank whose
branches were chartered by state banking
authorities BCCI
largely escaped the Federal Reserve's
scrutiny regarding its criminal
activities in the United States
unrelated to its interest in CCA H first
American this gap in regulatory
oversight has since been closed by the
passage of the foreign bank supervision
enhancement act of 1991 the US Treasury
Department failed to provide the Federal
Reserve with information it received
concerning BCCI's ownership of first
American in 1985 and 1986
from the CIA however IRS agents did
provide important information to the
Federal Reserve on this issue in early
1989 which the Federal Reserve failed
adequately to investigate at the time
the FDIC approved guys firown's'
purchase of the independence bank in
1985 knowing him to be a shareholder of
BCCI and knowing that he was placing a
senior BCCI officer in charge of the
bank and failed to confer with the
Federal Reserve or the OCC regarding
their previous experiences with Barone
and BCCI once the Federal Reserve
commenced a formal investigation of BCCI
and first American on January 3rd 1991
its investigation of BCCI and first
American was aggressive and diligent its
decisions to force BCCI
out of the United States and to divest
itself of first American were prompt the
charges that brought against the parties
involved with BCCI
and violating federal banking standards
were fully justified by the record its
investigations have over the past year
contributed substantially to public
understanding to date of what took place
even after the Federal Reserve
understood the nature and scope of
BCCI's frauds it did not seek to have
BCCI closed globally this position was
in some measure the consequence of the
Federal Reserve's need to secure the
cooperation of BCCI's majority
shareholders the government and royal
family of Abu Dhabi and providing some
190 million dollars to prop up first
American Bank and prevent an
embarrassing collapse however Federal
Reserve investigators did actively work
in the spring of 1991 to have BCCI's top
management removed in investigating BCCI
the Federal Reserve's efforts were
hampered by examples of lack of
cooperation by foreign governments
including most significantly the Serious
Fraud Office in the United Kingdom and
the closure of BCCI on July 5th 1991 the
government of Abu Dhabi
US regulatory handling of the US banks
secretly owned by BCCI was hampered by a
lack of coordination among the
regulator's which included the Federal
Reserve the FDIC and the OCC
highlighting the need for a further
integration of these separate banking
regulatory agencies on supervision and
enforcement 9 the Bank of England's
regulation of BCCI was wholly inadequate
to protect BCCI's depositors and
creditors and the Bank of England
withheld information about BCCI's frauds
from public knowledge for 15 months
before closing the bank the Bank of
England had deep concerns about BCCI
from the late 1970s on and undertook
several steps to slow BCCI's expansion
in the United Kingdom in 1988 and 1989
the Bank of England learned of BCCI's
involvement in the financing of
terrorism and in drug money laundering
and undertook additional but limited
supervision of BCCI in response to
receiving this information in the spring
of 1990 Price Waterhouse advised the
Bank of England that there were
substantial loan losses at BCCI numerous
poor banking practices and evidence of
fraud which together had created a
massive hole in bcc i--'s books the Bank
of England's response to the information
was not too close BCCI down but to find
ways to prop up BCCI
and prevent its collapse this meant
among other things keeping secret the
very serious nature of bcc i--'s
problems from its creditors and 1
million depositors
in April 1990 the Bank of England
reached an agreement with BCCI Abu Dhabi
and Pricewaterhouse to keep BCCI from
collapsing under the agreement Abu Dhabi
agreed to guarantee BCCI's losses and
Price Waterhouse agreed to certify
BCCI's books as a consequence innocent
depositors and creditors who did
business with BCCI following that date
were deceived into believing that BCCI's
financial problems were not as serious
as each of these parties already knew
them to be from April 1990 the Bank of
England relied on British bank secrecy
and confidentiality laws to reduce the
risk of BCCI's collapse if word of its
improprieties leaked out as a
consequence innocent depositors and
creditors who did business with BCCI
following that date were denied vital
information in the possession of
regulators auditors officers and
shareholders of BCCI that could have
protected them against their losses in
order to prevent risk to its
restructuring plan for BCCI and a
possible run on BCCI
the Bank of England withheld important
information from the Federal Reserve in
the spring of 1990 about the size and
scope of BCCI's lending on CCA H first
American shares
despite the Federal Reserve's requests
for such information this action by the
Bank of England delayed the opening of a
full investigation by the Federal
Reserve for approximately eight months
despite its knowledge of some of BCCI's
past frauds and its own understanding
that consolidation into a single entity
is essential for regulating a bank in
late 1990 and early 1991 the Bank of
England tentatively agreed with BCCI and
its Abu Dhabi owners to permit BCCI to
restructure as three separate
institutions based in London abu dhabi
and hong kong
this tentative decision demonstrated
extraordinarily poor judgment on the
part of the Bank of England this
decision was reversed abruptly when the
Bank of England suddenly decided to
close BCCI instead in late june 1991 the
decision by the Bank of England in April
1990 to permit BCCI to move its
headquarters officers and records out of
British jurisdiction to Abu Dhabi has
had profound negative consequences for
investigations of BCCI around the world
as a result of this decision essential
records and witnesses regarding what
took place were removed from the control
of the British government and placed
under the control of the government of
Abu Dhabi which has to date withheld
them from criminal investigators in the
US and UK this decision constituted a
costly and likely irretrievable error on
the part of the Bank of England 10 Clark
Clifford and Robert Altman participated
in improprieties with BCCI in the United
States regardless of whether Clifford
and Altman were deceived by BCCI in some
respects both men participated in some
BCCI deceptions in the United States
beginning in late 1977 Clifford and
Altman assisted BCCI in purchasing a US
bank financial general Bancshares
with the participation of nominees and
understood BCCI's central involvement in
directing and controlling the
transaction in the years that followed
they made business decisions regarding
acquisitions for first American that
were motivated by BCCI's goals rather
than by the business needs of first
American itself and represented as their
own to regulators decisions that had
been made by a B D and B CCI on
fundamental matters concerning first
American including the purchase my first
American of the National Bank of Georgia
and first Americans decision to purchase
branches in New York City
Clifford and Altman concealed their own
financing of shares
first American by BCCI from first
Americans other directors and from US
regulators withheld critical information
that they possessed firm regulators in
an effort to keep the truth about BCCI's
ownership of first American secret and
deceived regulators and the Congress
concerning their own knowledge of and
personal involvement in BCCI's
illegalities in the United States 11 Abu
Dhabi's involvement in BCCI's affairs
was far more central than it has
acknowledged involving in some cases
nominee relations and no-risk
transactions that Abu Dhabi is today
covering up through hiding witnesses and
documents from US investigators members
of Abu Dhabi's ruling family appear to
have contributed no more than $500,000
to BCCI's capitalization prior to April
1990 despite being the record owner of
almost one-quarter of the bank's total
shares an unknown but substantial
percentage of the shares acquired by Abu
Dhabi overall in BCCI appear to have
been acquired on a risk-free basis
either with guaranteed rates of return
buyback arrangements or both the
interest held in BCCI by the Abu Dhabi
ruling family like the interests held by
the rulers of the three other Gulf
shikdum Zin the United Arab Emirates who
owned shares of BCCI materially aided
and abetted a B D and B CCI in
projecting the illusion that BCCI was
backed by and capitalized by Abu Dhabi's
wealth investments made in BCCI by the
Abu Dhabi Investment Authority appear to
have been genuine although possibly
guaranteed by BCCI with buy back or
other no risk arrangements shares in
financial general Bancshares
held by members of the Abu Dhabi royal
family in late 1977 and early 1978
appeared to have been nominee
arrangements adopted by Abu Dhabi as a
convenience to BCCI
and a BD under arrangements
in which Abu Dhabi was to be without
risk and BCCI was to guarantee the
purchase through a commitment to buy
back the stock at an agreed-upon price
Abu Dhabi's representative to BCCI's
Board of Directors phantom Alma's Rui
received unorthodox financial benefits
from BCCI
in no-risk stock deals which may have
compromised his ability to exercise
independent judgment concerning BCCI's
actions confirmed at least one
fraudulent transaction involving Abu
Dhabi and engaged in other improprieties
pertaining to BCCI
but remains today in place at the apex
of Abu Dhabi's committee designated to
respond to BCCI's collapse in April 1990
Abu Dhabi was told in detail about
BCCI's fraud by top BCCI officials and
failed to advise BCCI's external
auditors of what it had learned between
April 1990 and November 1990 Abu Dhabi
and BCCI together kept some information
concerning BCCI's frauds hidden from the
auditors from April 1990 through July
5th 1991 Abu Dhabi tried to save BCCI
through a massive restructuring as part
of the restructuring process Abu Dhabi
agreed to take responsibility for BCCI's
losses Price Waterhouse agreed to
certify BCCI's books for another year
and Abu Dhabi Price Waterhouse the Bank
of England and BCCI agreed to keep all
information concerning BCCI's frauds and
other problems secret from BCCI's 1
million depositors as well as from US
regulators and law enforcement to
prevent a run on the bank
after the Federal Reserve was advised by
the New York District Attorney of
possible nominee Arrangements involving
BCCI and first American Abu Dhabi and an
apparent effort to gain the Federal
Reserve's acquiescence in BCCI's
proposed restructuring provided limited
cooperation to the Federal
serve including access to selected
documents the cooperation did not extend
to permitting the Federal Reserve open
access to all BCCI documents or
substantive communication with key BCCI
officials held in Abu Dhabi such as
BCCI's former president
Suellen Naqvi that access ended with the
closure of BCCI july fifth 1991 from
november 1990 through the present Abu
Dhabi has failed to provide documents
and witnesses to US law enforcement
authorities and to the Congress despite
repeated commitments to do so instead it
has actively prevented US investigators
from having access to vital information
necessary to investigate BCCI's global
wrongdoing the proposed agreement
between Abu Dhabi and BCCI's Liquidators
to settle their claims against one
another contains provisions which could
have the consequence of permitting Abu
Dhabi to cover up any wrongdoing it may
have had in connection with BCCI
there is some evidence that the sheikh
zayed may have had a political agenda in
agreeing to the involvement of members
of the abu dhabi royal family and its
Investment Authority and purchasing
shares of financial general Bancshares
then of CCA H first American this
evidence is offset in part by testimony
that Abu Dhabi share purchases in the US
bank were done at a biddies request and
did not represent an actual investment
by Abu Dhabi until much later 12 BCCI
made extensive use of the revolving door
and political influence peddling in the
United States to accomplish its goals
BCCI's political connections in
Washington had a material impact on its
ability to accomplish its goals in the
United States in hiring lawyers
lobbyists and public relations firms in
the United States to help it deal with
its problems visa via the government
BCCI pursued a strategy that it had
practiced successfully around the world
the hiring of former government
officials BCCI's and its shareholders
cadre of professional help in washington
DC included at various times a former
secretary of defense clark clifford
former senators and congressmen John
Culver Mike Barnes former federal
prosecutors Larry Wexler Raymond Burr
noon and Larry Barcella a former State
Department official William Rogers a
former White House aide Eadie Rogers a
current presidential campaign deputy
director James Lake and former Federal
Reserve attorneys Baldwin Tuttle Jerry
Hawke and Michael Brad field in addition
BCCI solicited the help of Henry
Kissinger who chose not to do business
with BCCI
but made a referral of BCCI to his own
lawyers at several key points in BCCI's
activities in the u.s. the political
influence and personal contacts of those
that hired had an impact in helping BCCI
accomplish its goals including in
connection with the 1981 CCA h
acquisition of FGB and the handling and
aftermath of bcc i--'s plea agreement in
tampa in 1990 the political connections
of bcc i--'s u.s. lawyers and lobbyists
were critical to impeding congressional
and law enforcement investigations from
1988 through 1991 through a variety of
techniques that included impugning the
motives and integrity of investigators
and journalists withholding subpoenaed
documents and lobbying on Capitol Hill
to protect BCCI's reputation and
discourage efforts to close the bank
down in the United States 13 BCCI's
public relations firm smeared people who
are telling the truth as part of its
work for BCCI when Hill and Knowlton
accepted BCCI's account in October 1988
its partners knew of BCCI's reputation
as a sleaze
the bank but took the account anyway in
1988 and 1989 Hill & Knowlton assisted
BCCI with an aggressive public relations
campaign designed to demonstrate that
BCCI was not a criminal enterprise and
to put the best face possible on the
Tampa drug money laundering indictments
and so doing it disseminated materials
unjustifiably and unfairly discrediting
persons and publications who were
telling the truth about BCCI's
criminality important information
provided by Hill & Knowlton to Capitol
Hill and provided by first American to
regulators concerning the relationship
between BCCI and first American in April
1990 was false the misleading material
represented the position of BCCI first
American Clifford and Altman concerning
the relationship and was contrary to the
truth known by BCCI Clifford and Altman
Hill & Knowlton 'he's representation of
BCCI was within the norms and standards
of the public relations industry but
raises larger questions as to the
relationship of those norms and
standards to the public interest 14 BCCI
actively solicited the friendships of
major US political figures and made
payments to these political figures
which in some cases may have been
improper beginning with Bert Lance in
1977 whose debts BCCI paid off with a
3.5 million dollar loan BCCI BCCI
nominees and top officials of BCCI
systematically developed friendships and
relationships with important US
political figures while those which are
publicly known include former President
Jimmy Carter Jesse Jackson and Andrew
Young the subcommittee has received
information suggesting that BCCI's
network extended to other US political
figures the payments made by BCC
to Andrew Young while he was a public
official or at best unusual and by all
appearances improper 15 bcc i--'s
commodities affiliate capcom engaged in
billions of dollars of largely anonymous
trading in the US which included a very
substantial level of money laundering
while capcom simultaneously developed
significant ties to important US
telecommunications industry executives
and foreign intelligence figures bcc
i--'s commodities affiliate capcom based
in Chicago London and Cairo was
principally staffed by former BCCI
bankers capitalized by BCCI
and BCCI customers and owned by BCCI
BCCI shareholders and frontmen capcom
employed many of the same practices as
BCCI especially the use of nominees and
front companies to disguise ownership
and the movement of money for US
citizens
none of whom had any experience or
expertise in the commodities markets
played important and varied roles as
Capcom frontmen in the United States
while investigation information
concerning Capcom is incomplete its
activities appear to have included
misappropriation of BCCI assets the
laundering of billions of dollars from
the Middle East to the US and other
parts of the world and the siphoning of
assets from BCCI to create a safe haven
for them outside of the official BCCI
Empire
Capcom's major shareholders Kamal Adham
and AR Khalil were both former senior
Saudi government officials and
successively acted as Saudi Arabia's
principal liaisons to the Central
Intelligence Agency during the 1970s and
1980s its u.s. front men included Robert
Magnus the CEO of the largest US cable
telecommunications company TCI a vice
president of TCI
romrell and two other Americans carry
Foxx and Robert Powell with
long-standing business interests in the
Middle East
Magnus romrell and Fox received loans
from BCCI for real-estate ventures in
the US and Magnus and romrell discussed
numerous business ventures between BCCI
and TCI
some of which involved the possible
purchase of US telecommunications stock
and substantial lending by BCCI
commodities regulators with the
responsibility for investigating Capcom
showed little interest in conducting a
thorough investigation of its activities
and in 1989 allowed Capcom to avoid such
an investigation through agreeing to
cease doing business in the United
States the subcommittee could not
determine whether BCCI Capcom or their
shareholders or agents actually acquired
equity interests in the u.s. cable
industry and believes further
investigation of matters pertaining to
Capcom is essential 16 investigations of
BCCI to date remain incomplete and many
leads cannot be followed up as the
result of documents being withheld from
US investigators by the British
government and documents and witnesses
being withheld from US investigators by
the government of Abu Dhabi many of
these specific criminal transactions
engaged in by BCCI's customers remain
hidden from investigation as the result
of bank secrecy laws in many
jurisdictions British national security
laws and the holding of key witnesses
and documents by the government of Abu
Dhabi documents pertaining to BCC is
used to finance terrorism to assist the
builders of a Pakistani nuclear bomb to
finance Iranian armed steals and related
matters have been sealed in the United
Kingdom by British intelligence and
remain unavailable to US investigators
many other basic matters pertaining to
BCCI's criminality
including any list that may exist of
BCCI's political payoffs and bribes
remains sequestered in Abu Dhabi and
unavailable to US investigators many
investigative leads remain to be
explored but cannot be answered without
devoting substantial additional sources
that to date no agency of government has
been in a position to provide unanswered
questions include but are not limited to
the relationship between BCCI
and the banco nacional del lavoro
the alleged relationship between the
late CIA director William Casey and BCCI
the extent of BCCI's involvement in
Pakistan's nuclear program BCCI's
manipulation of commodities and
securities markets in Europe and Canada
BCCI's activities in India including its
relationship with the business empire of
the Hinduja family BCCI's relationships
with convicted iraqi arms dealer Sarkis
Sark an alien Syrian drug trafficker
terrorists and arms trafficker Monza
alczar and other major arms dealers the
use of BCCI by central figures in the
alleged October Surprise BCCI's
activities with the Central Bank of
Syria and with the foreign trade mission
of the Soviet Union in London its
involvement with foreign intelligence
agencies the financial dealings of BCCI
directors with Charles Keating and
several Keating affiliates and front
companies including the possibility that
VC CI related entities may have
laundered funds for Keating to move them
outside the United States BCCI's
financing of commodities and other
business dealings of international
criminal financier Mark rich the nature
extent and meaning of the ownership of
other major US financial institutions by
Middle Eastern political figures the
nature extent and meaning of real estate
and financial investments in the United
States by major shareholders of BCCI
the sale of BCCI affiliate bulk de
commerce a place mall in Geneva to the
cuca of a group of Turkey which owned an
entity involved in the BNL Iraqi arms
sales among others the withholding of
documents and witnesses from US
investigators by the government of Abu
Dhabi threatens vital US foreign policy
anti-narcotics
and money laundering and law enforcement
interests and should not be tolerated
summary of legislative recommendations 1
the subcommittee recommends that the
United States develop a more aggressive
and coordinated approach to
international financial crime and to
move further against foreign privacy and
confidential laws that protect criminals
to the subcommittee recommends that the
Justice Department reconsider the
policies and practices that led to its
ineffectiveness in investigating and
prosecuting BCCI and impaired its
ability to cooperate with other
investigations of BCCI being conducted
by the Federal Reserve New York District
Attorney and the Senate three the
subcommittee recommends that the Central
Intelligence Agency and State Department
upgrade the tracking of foreign
financial institutions and activities
and the dissemination of information
concerning such institutions for the
subcommittee recommends that the
Congress consider whether additional
oversight mechanisms are necessary to
ensure the CIA's accountability on the
provision of information
5 the subcommittee recommends that
federal agencies impose new requirements
on foreign auditors to protect US
interests in any case in which any such
agency is relying on an audit certified
by a foreign auditor at minimum this
should require foreign auditors whose
certifications are used by institutions
doing business in the u.s. agree to
submit themselves to US laws
six the subcommittee recommends that the
President and the Secretary of State
advised the government of Abu Dhabi that
its withholding of documents and
witnesses pertaining to BCCI from US
federal law enforcement investigators
the Federal Reserve the New York
District Attorney and the Congress
threatens vital US interests and will
not be tolerated seven further attention
needs to be given to the problem of the
revolving door in Washington and the
impact on the regulatory process and on
law enforcement of political influence
in Washington the subcommittee
recommends the consideration of
legislating a federal statutory code of
conduct for attorneys who practice
before federal agencies eight the
self-regulation of the u.s. commodities
markets by the Commodities Futures
Trading Commission the Chicago Board of
Trade and the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange is inadequate to protect those
markets against money laundering
involving trades from abroad the
subcommittee recommends that the
exchanges make money laundering illegal
and demand that this requirement be
accepted by foreign commodities
exchanges with whom they do business as
a condition of access to US exchanges 9
the subcommittee
recommends that further steps be taken
to ensure adequate accountability of
foreign financial institutions doing
business in the United States including
requiring foreign banks form separately
capitalized holding companies in the
United States as a condition of license
and the consideration by the Federal
Reserve of establishing a minimum
standard for consolidated regulation
that excludes bank regulatory havens 10
the subcommittee recommends that foreign
investors who purchase substantial
shares of US businesses be required to
appear personally in the United States
as insurance that the foreign investor
is not acting as a nominee for someone
else 11 turf wars continue to severely
damage the ability of law enforcement
agencies in the United States to do
their job the subcommittee recommends
the establishment of a committee of law
enforcement officials whose job it is to
conduct oversight of prevent and respond
to failures of cooperation and law
enforcement 12 the subcommittee
recommends that a statutory mechanism
for the receipt by Congress of foreign
financial information be established
introduction and summary of
investigation BCCI cannot be taken as an
isolated example of a rogue Bank but a
case study of the vulnerability of the
world to international crime on a global
scale that is beyond the current ability
of governments to control its
multibillion-dollar collapse is merely
the latest in a series of international
financial scandals that have been
deviled international banking this
century its techniques and its
associations with government officials
intelligence agencies and arms
traffickers or neither knew nor unique
for example as far back as the 1920s the
International match corporation bilked
shareholders and lenders out of some 500
million dollars through switching
company assets and liabilities among a
series of
shell entities creating fictional
assets when existing ones were adequate
and through transferring funds from the
United States offshore all the while its
chairman Ivan Kruger maintained
friendships with numerous world leaders
including then u.s. President Herbert
Hoover in a manner reminiscent of BCCI's
founder Agha Hassan a biddies
relationships with President Carter a
half a century later during the 1960's
the Channel Islands off the coast of
England became the host to a series of
post office box banks including the
infamous bank of Sark whose facilities
included a room over a pub a desk and a
telephone that headquarters proved
adequate to enable the swindlers who
established the bank to use it to sell
some 100 million dollars in fraudulent
checks and letters of credit on the
phantom bank before their criminality
was discovered in the same period bernie
Kornfeld
chairman of the investors overseas
service iOS which sold the fund of funds
and fugitive financier Robert Vesco
siphoned off hundreds of millions of
dollars from investors in the mutual
fund that at its height had three
billion dollars in assets under its
management in doing so it moved funds
held at Credit Suisse to a small Bank
which iOS itself owned based in
Luxembourg from which the funds
disappeared again this technique
anticipated the methods used by BCCI to
shift assets from legitimate
institutions to its own and then to
engage in wire transfers sufficient to
make them impossible to track similar
techniques were used by Italian
financier Michel Sindona in connection
with his management of Banco Ambrosiano
in Italy and by former CIA agent Michael
hand in the drug money laundering new
gun hand bank in Australia during the
late 1970's and early 1980s the latter
institution had numerous ties to US
intelligence and military personnel
which have never been
and thus the rise and fall of BCCI is
not an isolated phenomenon but a
recurrent problem that has grown along
with the growth of the international
financial community itself given the
extraordinary magnitude of international
financial transactions which amount to
some four trillion dollars per day
moving through the New York clearance
system alone the opportunities for fraud
are huge
the rewards great and the systems put in
place to protect against them far from
adequate as this report demonstrates in
some detail the scope and variety of
BCCI's criminality and the issues raised
by that criminality are immense and
beyond the scope of any single
investigation or report this report the
product of some four years of
investigation by the subcommittee while
extensive can merely provide a basic
guideline to the fundamental facts and
issues raised by the BCCI affair the
subcommittee investigation of BCCI began
in February 1988 early in the second
year of a two-year investigation of the
relationship between drug trafficking to
u.s. foreign policy and law enforcement
that had been authorized by the full
committee during a hearing on general
Noriega x' drug trafficking and money
laundering BCCI was identified as
facilitating Noriega x' criminal
activity in march 1988 the Foreign
Relations Committee authorized the
issuance of subpoenas to BCCI and those
at the bank involved in handling Noriega
s-- assets and the accounts of others in
Panama and Colombia service of those
subpoenas was delayed at the request of
the Justice Department and US Customs
Service due to concern that its service
could interfere with an ongoing sting
operation of BCCI in Tampa operation C
Chase by the time the Subcommittee
secured the permission of federal
authorities to move forward with service
of the subpoena in late July in 1988 the
subcommittee
had completed the public hearings in
connection with its investigative
mandate and was proceeding to complete
its final report with no further
investigative efforts planned
however service of the subpoena set into
motion a series of contacts during the
late summer and early fall involving the
subcommittee BCCI officials and bcc
i--'s attorneys including clark clifford
and robert altman during those contacts
BCCI officials advised subcommittee
counsel Jack bloom that in their view
BCCI and its attorneys were obstructing
the subcommittee's efforts to
investigate the bank the subcommittee
conducted a deposition of one key BCCI
official I'm shad Awan shortly before
his arrest in the customs sting and
deposed a second former BCCI officer
following the sting during the final
days of the authorization given the
subcommittee by the Foreign Relations
Committee thus as the two-year
investigation of the subcommittee
authorized by the Foreign Relations
Committee ended investigating BCCI
remained a major piece of unfinished
subcommittee business in the spring of
1989 Senator Kerry
chairman of the subcommittee authorized
Blum as he was leaving the subcommittee
to provide the information he had
developed to the Justice Department
after the Justice Department in blooms
view had failed to follow up on the
information provided he took the same
information to New York District
Attorney Robert Morgenthau who shortly
commenced his investigation of BCCI
based in substantial part on the leads
provided him by Blum and the
subcommittee in the meantime Senator
Kerry asked two members of his personal
staff to continue the investigation from
within his personal office until such
time as further authorization might be
granted from the Foreign Relations
Committee or another committee of formal
jurisdiction for a committee
investigation
during 1989 and 1990 staff and Senator
Kerry's office had numerous contacts
with BCCI's attorneys certain BCCI
customers and in a truncated fashion
with BCCI officials in an attempt to
determine whether allegations concerning
BCCI's secret ownership of first
american bank shares were correct and as
part of an effort to identify the extent
and nature of bcc i--'s support of drug
money laundering in January 1990 when
the Justice Department entered into a
plea agreement with BCCI
Senator Kerry criticized the plea
agreement for permitting BCCI to avoid
trial and the 14 million dollar fine as
insufficient punishment for an
institution which had a corporate policy
of laundering drug money at the same
time the subcommittee published a report
on drug money laundering which focused
in part on further questions concerning
BCCI
including BCCI's alleged secret
ownership of first American during the
spring and summer of 1990 Senator
Kerry's staff conducted further
investigative efforts concerning BCC i
met with bcc i--'s and first Americans
attorneys on several occasions
attempting to obtain BCCI documents in
July 1990 Senator Kerry in his capacity
as chairman of the subcommittee
scheduled hearings on VC CI which were
postponed after bcc i--'s attorneys and
the Justice Department advised staff
that each of the requested witnesses
including BCCI attorney and first
American president Robert Altman would
decline the subcommittee's request to
testify after efforts to obtain
authorization for the investigation
within the Banking Committee failed
senator Kerry decided in early 1991 to
formalize the personal staff
investigation within the subcommittee
and to seek formal authorization for an
investigation from the Foreign Relations
Committee which was granted on May 23rd
1991 without dissent
together with this authorization the
Foreign Relations Committee authorized
the issuance of a subpoena to BCCI for
records pertaining to its dealings with
foreign officials of a number of
countries arms dealers and focusing on
its secret ownership of US financial
institutions at this time Senator Kerry
was joined in further investigative
efforts by his ranking member senator
Brown while the Foreign Relations
Committee provided consistent support
for the subcommittee's efforts through
1991 and 1992 staffing resources for the
investigation remained limited amounting
to two attorneys with no budget for
travel the lack of resources
particularly hampered efforts to
investigate matters pertaining to BCCI's
activities outside the United States
authority for subpoenas and writs were
granted by the committee to the
subcommittee on May 23rd 1991 November
27 1991 February 29th 1992 June 4th 1992
in all the subcommittee conducted 13
days of public hearings on August 1st
2nd 8th October 18th 22nd 23rd 24th 25th
and November 21st 1991 February 19th
March 18th May 14th and July 30th 1992
one day of closed hearings on October
31st 1991 and staffed an additional day
of hearings in the Senate Banking
Subcommittee on consumer and regulatory
affairs on May 23rd 1991 both by
subpoena and by request documents were
received from many institutions agencies
and individuals including BCCI itself
many of BCCI's attorneys and law firms
many former BCCI officials
representatives of BCCI's creditors and
depositors Pricewaterhouse bcc i--'s
accountants clark clifford and robert
altman the first american bank
the federal reserve office of Thrift
Supervision Resolution Trust Corporation
office of the comptroller of the
currency
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
majority shareholders of BCCI
Abu Dhabi the Central Intelligence
Agency the US Customs Service the State
Department the Department of Agriculture
former federal prosecutors and
investigators and many others in
addition the subcommittee has been
vitally assisted by certain BCCI
insiders who while still working at BCCI
during the period of its operation
became sufficiently angered and
disgusted by what they had observed that
they contacted the subcommittee and
agreed to provide the subcommittee with
information on an ongoing basis these
insiders helped the subcommittee to
document improprieties involving BCCI's
attorneys senior officers and
shareholders as well as certain failures
to act on information by federal law
enforcement many matters remain to be
investigated and these are outlined in
the executive summary and in the final
chapter on conclusions and legislative
recommendations what is absolutely clear
is that the United States needs to
exercise far more leadership in helping
develop a system for monitoring and
regulating the movement of funds across
international borders to replace the
current inadequate patchwork system that
BCCI
with all of its faults so aptly took
advantage of to defraud over 1 million
depositors and thousands of creditors
from countries all over the world
equally important is for the United
States to give renewed attention to the
difficulty of monitoring the actual
circumstances and intentions of foreign
investors seeking to acquire US
institutions as the BCCI case
demonstrates such investments pose
special difficulties for both
investigation and prosecution should
something go wrong
finally influence-peddling
the revolving door and the willingness
of well
placed and prominent people in
Washington to provide services to
whoever once in the door and is willing
to pay one's fees as a phenomenon that
poses very substantial dangers for our
system of government as the BCCI case
suggests higher standards of conduct by
the private sector in Washington that
lives alongside of government is an
essential part of making it possible for
government to work the lack of those
standards was a significant factor in
BCCI's success in committing crimes and
the government's failures in doing
anything about them